Gh-415: In-depth aggregation guide (#420)
gchq/gaffer-doc: docs/administration-guide/aggregation/overview.md

# Aggregation Guide

A basic introduction to the concept of Aggregation in Gaffer can be found in the
[User Guide](../../user-guide/gaffer-basics/what-is-aggregation.md). This guide is
an extension of the introduction to demonstrate more advanced usage of
Aggregation and how it can be applied.

## Ingest Aggregation

Ingest aggregation permanently aggregates similar elements together in the Graph
as they are loaded. The application of ingest aggregation is done via the Graph
schema which will apply the aggregation if one of the following conditions are
met:

- An entity has the same `group`, `vertex` (e.g. ID), `visibility` and all `groupBy`
  property values are the same.
- An edge has the same `group`, `source`, `destination`, and all `groupBy`
  property values are the same.

There are a few different use cases for applying ingest aggregation but it is
largely driven by the data you have and the analysis you wish to perform. As an
example, say you were expecting multiple connections of the same edge between

> two nodes but each instance of the edge may have differing values on it's
> properties this could be a place to apply aggregation to sum the values etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
two nodes but each instance of the edge may have differing values on its
properties, this could be a place to apply aggregation to sum the values etc.
```

> Please see the [following page](ingest-example.md) for some common use cases and
> how you could apply ingest aggregation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please see the [ingest aggregation example](ingest-example.md) for some common
use cases on how this can be applied.
```

# Aggregation Guide

A basic introduction to the concept of Aggregation in Gaffer can be found in the
[User Guide](../../user-guide/gaffer-basics/what-is-aggregation.md). This guide is
an extension of the introduction to demonstrate more advanced usage of
Aggregation and how it can be applied.

> Aggregation is applied in Gaffer through an aggregation function these can take

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Aggregation is applied in Gaffer through an aggregation function. These can take
```

a number of forms but the common factor between them is that they use the

> underlying koryphe library to provide the

Reviewer 2: link the library?

[`ElementAggregator`](https://gchq.github.io/Gaffer/uk/gov/gchq/gaffer/data/element/function/ElementAggregator.html).

## Ingest Aggregation

Ingest aggregation permanently aggregates similar elements together in the Graph
as they are loaded. The application of ingest aggregation is done via the Graph
schema which will apply the aggregation if one of the following conditions are
met:

- An entity has the same `group`, `vertex` (e.g. ID), `visibility` and all `groupBy`

>   property values are the same.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  property values.
```

- An edge has the same `group`, `source`, `destination`, and all `groupBy`
  property values are the same.

There are a few different use cases for applying ingest aggregation but it is
largely driven by the data you have and the analysis you wish to perform. As an
example, say you were expecting multiple connections of the same edge between
two nodes but each instance of the edge may have differing values on its
properties, this could be a place to apply aggregation to sum the values etc.

Please see the [ingest aggregation example](ingest-example.md) for some common
use cases on how this can be applied.

## Query-time Aggregation

> Query-time aggregation as the name suggests is adding aggregation to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Query-time aggregation, as the name suggests, is adding aggregation to
```

elements from within the graph query. This differs from ingest aggregation

> as only the results of the query will have been aggregated the data stored

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as only the results of the query will have been aggregated; the data stored
```

in the graph remains unchanged.

> Generally to apply aggregation at query-time you must override the `groupBy`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Generally, to apply aggregation at query-time you must override the `groupBy`
```
